Add DevSecOps in Action: Kubernetes Secrets blog post (#45640)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2025-01-15-devsecops-in-action-k8s-secrets/index.md

---
layout: blog
title: "DevSecOps in Action: Kubernetes Secrets"
slug: devsecops-in-action-k8s-secrets
date: 2025-01-15
author: >
  Evgenii Frikin
---

The Secret is one of the basic resources that exists in the Kubernetes API. This
kind of resource is used for different purposes and despite the name Secret,
sensitive data is insecure to store in it. Recently considerable attention has
been paid to
[security improvement](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/encrypt-data/)
for objects such as Secrets, but Kubernetes still doesn't include appropriate
solutions

According to
[Good practices for Kubernetes Secrets](/docs/concepts/security/secrets-good-practices/)
there are several options on how to improve security of this kind of Secret:
encrypt secrets in the etcd, restrict the access to them via RBAC, configure
access to external Secret, etc. However, this partially solves the security issue
because they are cluster-side solutions and they help to improve security of the
cluster overall.

In the modern world, unilateral solutions aren't effective enough and can hide
security issues known as

> [Security through obscurity](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Security_through_obscurity).

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
[Security through obscurity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Security_through_obscurity).
```

To avoid it, I'm sure it's necessary to integrate DevSecOps methodology
which implies integrated security as a shared responsibility throughout the
entire IT lifecycle. In other words, security solutions must start with the
development process and apply to all other levels correspondingly.

According to
[OWASP Secrets Management Cheat Sheet](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Secrets_Management_Cheat_Sheet.html#5-containers-orchestrators),
it's recommended to use Injection of Secret via file and in-memory. Provision of
sensitive data via environment variables isn't recommended, but at the same time
it's recommended in The
[Twelve Factors](https://12factor.net/config).
These are general recommendations which don't impact security issues that's why
their application should make sense, but passing config via environment variables
with sensitive data must be kept to a minimum.

Injection of Secret via file and in-memory has pros and cons and I would like to

> show which security issues exist when using Injection of Secret via file and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
show which security issues exist when injecting data from a Secret via file(s), and to
```
?

suggest solutions. In fact, there will be a general solution and specific
implementation will be different in terms of specific management and delivery
secrets tools. To keep the examples simple I will use `spec.initContainers` to
simulate an injection agent for delivering secrets to Pod.

## Baseline application

Imagine there is a simple application which processes http requests. On request
to `root` location client receives environment variable value
`DEMO_SECRET__PASSWD` which is defined via
[`spec.containers.0.envFrom.secretRef.name`](assets/baseline/kustomization/overlays/demo/kustomization.yml)
in Pod resource. On request `/readiness` receives status application
(ready or not ready) and if the environment variable isn't defined Pod doesn't
change status to `READY`.

> [`cmd/main.go`](assets/baseline/cmd/main.go)

Reviewer: We _usually_ prefer site relative URLS such as `/blog/2025/01/15/devsecops-in-action-k8s-secrets/assets/baseline/cmd/main.go`. I know it's a bit awkward but that's the usual recommendation.

```suggestion
[`cmd/main.go`](/blog/2025/01/15/devsecops-in-action-k8s-secrets/assets/baseline/cmd/main.go)
```

    volumeMounts:
    - mountPath: /secrets
      name: demo-secret
      readOnly: true
  volumes:
  - name: demo-secret
    secret:
      optional: true
      secretName: demo-secret

<skipped>
```

`spec.containers.0.envFrom` defines all of the Secret's data as container
environment variables and `spec.volume/spec.containers.0.volumeMounts`
mounts the Secret as a volume to the Pod.

Excellent! Part of recommendations have been completed, but for the full picture
it's necessary to solve the following issues:

* The secret file is mounted as a volume and it's necessary to remove after it usage
(e.g reading)
* Kind Secret is insecure that's why it's necessary to minimize its use
* Additional implementation of environment variable such as:
`DEMO_SECRET__PASSWD_FILE` can Impede applications update.

## Stage-02: Injection of secret to Pod instead of mountpoint

In order to get rid of Secret as mountpoint it's necessary to use Injection of
Secret via file to Pod. Often secret manager tools perform these functions.
Also they provide functions such as: dynamic secrets, database credential
rotation, automated PKI infrastructure, data encryption and tokenization,

> identity-based access, key management, etc.

Reviewer: I'm not sure this is true. What about environment variables?

Author: In the example (stage-03 or viper) is used environment variables in order to define path to file where is stored sensitive data. Some secret managers (agent) can injected file with sensitive data instead of mounting to Pod (e.g. via annotations). Next, application readed file and removed. (also agent can removed it after some delay)  That's why environment variable(s) should store only path to file but not sensitive data.

In the example below, simulation of getting secret from secure storage and
delivery to Pod will be done via `spec.initContainers` then
`spec.containers.0.postStart` hook will clean the file after successful passing
of readiness probe in order to make file with sensitive data to Pod useless for
attacker.

> [`kustomization.yaml`](assets/stage-02/kustomization/overlays/demo/kustomization.yml)

Reviewer: Please make this a site-relative link

```yaml

<skipped>

  initContainers:
    - name: secret-injector
      image: alpine:3.19
      command:
        - sh
        - -c
        - cat /dev/urandom | base64 -w 0 | fold -w 16 | head -1 > ${DEMO_SECRET__PASSWD_FILE}
      envFrom:
         -  secretRef:
             name: demo-secret
      volumeMounts:
        - mountPath: /secrets
          name: demo-secret

<skipped>

    lifecycle:
      postStart:
        exec:
          command:
          - sh
          - -c
          - wget -qO- localhost:8080/readiness && echo > ${DEMO_SECRET__PASSWD_FILE}
```

The container must change status to `READY` after the application reads a file
with secret, otherwise `spec.containers.0.postStart` hook will clean it.

## Stage-03: Smooth update

So at the current moment, the application can be configured via the environment
variable `DEMO_SECRET__PASSWD_FILE` containing a path to a secret file and if
the file exists (checking via `/readianess` probe) then read it.

> [`cmd/main.go`](assets/stage-03/cmd/main.go)

Reviewer: Please make this a site-relative link

			fmt.Fprintln(w, "Environment variable was defined")
		} else {
			w.WriteHeader(http.StatusNotFound)
			fmt.Fprintln(w, "Environment variable wasn't defined")
		}
	default:
		w.WriteHeader(http.StatusNotFound)
		fmt.Fprintln(w, "404 Not Found")
	}
}
```
In fact everything works and you can stop here. Unfortunately in the real world
there are a lot of already working services and they must have implementation of
additional environment variables. This isn't always possible and this approach
can have specific limitations. In order to reduce the amount of limitations it's
necessary to implement an approach based on support of both
functions (variables) but without additional environment variables.
This approach allows not to implement additional variable but to use the current
variable for two cases:

* legacy: using env variable for storing sensitive data
* new: using env variable for storing path to file with sensitive data and
override current value to value from the file

To distinguish sensitive data values from path to file, by using prefixes,
this will allow you to use the same variable and follow OWASP recommendations.

First let's define variables and constants:

> [`cmd/main.go`](assets/stage-03/cmd/main.go)

Reviewer: Please make this a site-relative link

```go
const (
	envVar = "DEMO_SECRET__PASSWD"
	filePrefix = "file://"
)

var (
	envVal, filePath string
	isExistFile, isExistEnv, changed bool
)
```

Next, it's necessary to change the `fileExist` function. It's supposed to return
a path to the file without a prefix if the file exists.

> [`cmd/main.go`](assets/stage-03/cmd/main.go)

Reviewer: Please make this a site-relative link

```go
func fileExist(path string) (string, bool) {
	if strings.HasPrefix(path, filePrefix) {
		path = strings.TrimPrefix(path, filePrefix)
		info, err := os.Stat(path)
		if err == nil {
			return path, !info.IsDir()
		}
		if errors.Is(err, os.ErrNotExist) {
			return "", false
		}
	}
	return "", false
}
```

Magic happens in the `httpHandle` function. Environment variable value is passed
into function, if it's a file it will be read and current environment variable
value will be overridden by a new value that was read from the file.

> [`cmd/main.go`](assets/stage-03/cmd/main.go)

Reviewer: Please make this a site-relative link
